---
layout: post
---

I’ve been slacking on updating the blog, mostly because I’ve been trying to focus on my diss and a few other projects I’ve been working on. I at least had time to write this piece, a sketch for the theoretical section that will eventually appear in my diss introduction. That will be in some heavily modified form, anyway. I’ll have to tweak it to make it a workable intro, since here I don’t talk about punk or anything else musical, really. I’d also like to expand it into a more general methodological essay down the road (which will require reorganizing and expanding, adding examples from outside of punk, etc.). I've broken it up into two parts, the second of which should be forthcoming soon!

My dissertation is about 1970s New York punk (the Ramones, Patti Smith Group, Blondie, etc.). It takes its cue from what I see as the *aporetic* status of punk in the popular and scholarly world: On the one hand, punk is seemingly self-evident as a genre, three-chord rock that sonifies urban grit and grime. On the other hand, it is a genre that is curiously diffuse from a stylistic and philosophical standpoint, and has inspired a great deal of conflicting accounts of what it is all about. It’s hard for any given narrative about punk – as anarchic noise, as retro rock, as deconstructive postmodern avant-garde, etc. – to gather up the Sex Pistols, Blondie, Patti Smith, and Suicide (let alone explain how those earlier artists link up to later groups like Bad Brains, Green Day, and Pussy Riot).

This question pointed me toward genre theory. In attempting to unravel punk’s puzzling status, I started thinking more about what genres are, how they work musically and conceptually, and where their identity really lies (In sound? In style? In people’s imaginations?). I started to link this up to my more general interest in historical materialist philosophy (which I explain a bit more about below). It occurred to me that some of genre’s more evasive aspects start to look a little more clear when linked up to the tensions between ideas and social practices that have been placed at the fore in a lot of philosophical projects from German idealism to Marxism to critical theory. Essentially, my starting place was attempting to think about how genres exist in a fuzzy space between a.) ideas, the strictly imagined and invented kind of thinking about genre that stresses its ideological rather than physical characteristics, and b.) musical material, which often, especially in talk about punk, gets reduced to mere sonic or musical similarity (eg. I-IV-V progressions, feedback, etc.). This is a first attempt at articulating an account of what that space is. Here it is.
<br>
<br>
**Genre & Historical Materialism**
<br>
At the core of my account is the idea of historical materialism. Simply put by the philosopher Raya Dunayevskaya, historical materialism hinges on “the unity of theory and practice.”<sup>1</sup> The central question guiding this line of inquiry concerns the troubled relationship between a.) the domain of material life, including not just production and reproduction of human life but more broadly, the patterns and activities humans engage in socially, and b.) the domain of thought, the intellectual activities through which human beings exchange with each other and make sense of their world. Historical materialism names not only the set of concepts and ways of thinking about this, but also a tradition concerned with this problematic. This links a range of philosophical and political projects, most centrally in three key moments: 1.) German philosophy of the late eighteenth- and early nineteenth-centuries, especially the idealism of Kant and Hegel 2.) Marxian thought proper and its many instantiations in political theory (Leninism, Maoism, etc.), and 3.) the many traditions that engage with Marx during the twentieth-and twenty-first-centuries: the Frankfurt School, Black Radical thought, Marxist-feminism, and so on.<sup>2</sup>

Historical materialism regards the linking of thought and activity as a necessary one, but also a problematic one. It is easy to argue that we *should* take seriously both intellectual and political activity (as I would), but it’s important to remember that people usually don’t. Take for example, the relationship between academic musicology and social movements. While we’d all love to believe our discipline can contribute to real-world change, I’m sure I’m not alone in recognizing that, minimally, it doesn’t always do so. The philosopher Gillian Rose argues that historical materialism be thought of *aporetically*, “as stressing the gap between theory and practice, which strain towards each other.”<sup>3</sup> It thus names the fraught effort to unite the two spheres, to bend thought toward activity and live in a way that is more in accordance with our notions of the good.

This is why music has a special place in discussions of historical materialism. Like human sociality more generally, music exists in a blurry space between its material constitution and its entanglement in ideas, that complex collection of values, categories, and concepts that we use to engage with music. Music is, on the one hand, an object. It is sensuous *thing*, what we call sound. On the other hand, music is an *idea*. The term music functions as a placeholder, one which often far exceeds the thing it stands in for. Music is about meaning, feelings, culture at large. Sometimes, it feels like it is about anything but music. This gives it a dual identity. It is an idea grafted onto sound. And this graft rarely takes. Music is unstable because these two identities make competing claims, ones that are seldom reconciled. I would allege (contentiously and in a way that can’t possibly be defended in this dissertation), that the history of music studies has largely been a series of figures on this untenable relationship.

Genre plays a special role in this conversation, because it sits at the intersection of music as cultural practice and music as sound. Let me formalize a bit more clearly what I mean when I refer to genre before I expand on that. In the loosest sense, genre refers to the material and conceptual elements that link texts of various kinds, what I’ll refer to hereafter as “norms.”<sup>4</sup> As the genre theorist John Frow writes, genre in its most general refers to “a set of conventional and highly organized constraints on the production and interpretation of meaning.”<sup>5</sup> In other words, genre refers to the categories that musicians and audiences use to negotiate musical practices. Such practices not only include key categories for musical works, novels, and films (areas where the term most often appears), but also non-artistic practices (official discourse like emails and announcements, even everyday speech acts, and many other examples). Categories saturate our lives; as Jason Toynbee suggests, few things escape the “inevitability of genre.”<sup>6</sup>

This is not necessarily because rules abound in some mythically ordered universe, but because we depend on relationships between texts in order to find them meaningful. Indeed, constraints should not only suggest restrictions (a partial reason for my preference of the term norms, about which I’ll say more below). Really, as David Brackett writes, genre enables meaning:

<blockquote>It is a condition of the legibility of a text that a listener can place it in the context of a genre, that is, in the context of how sounds, lyrics, images, performer personae, musical rhetoric, and a generic label (among other things) can be related. In order for this to occur, texts must cite or refer to generic conventions that predate them.<sup>7</sup></blockquote>

Genre is not a set of rules one must follow, or even a set of optional codes that one can choose to ignore. Rather, genre is a space for understanding continuity and transgression, endorsement and rejection, the love of tradition and the desecration of what is sacred.

Given this, genre theory becomes of particular interest from the standpoint of historical materialism. We simply cannot bypass the tense relationship between musical concepts and practices in discussing genre. Genre theory partially concerns rules and categories, the most abstract of abstractions. But its purchase, if it has any, lies is in its attentiveness to those most immediate senses we have when we listen to something and think, “this sounds like…” Genre is the term that bridges the gap between music’s status as something interpreted and something heard, between its status as thing and concept.
<br>
<br>

**Genre as Idea**
<br>
Despite this, materialism has played a rather limited role in musical thought in recent years. Rather, I would argue that to the contrary, an idealist tradition has dominated thought about genre. The distinction between materialism and idealism is best understood in the context of Marx’s critique of German philosophy. Throughout his career, Marx challenged the abstraction that guided philosophy to privilege grand ideas over lived experience. He called for a new form of thought rooted in the conditions of daily life. This was a point developed extensively in his 1846 text *German Ideology*, co-authored with Frederick Engels. The text took the form of a lengthy critique of Hegel and his liberal disciples (the so-called Young Hegelians), who Marx saw as the dominant figures in philosophy in his time. Marx condemned the way Hegelian categories continued to lord over a philosophical practice that ostensibly was in the service of progressive causes:

<blockquote>Since according to their fantasy, the relations of people, all their doings, their fetters and their limitations are products of their consciousness, the Young Hegelians put to them the moral postulate of exchanging their present consciousness for human, critical or egoistic consciousness, and thus of removing their limitations. This demand to change consciousness amounts to a demand to interpret the existing world in a different way.<sup>8</sup></blockquote>

Marx castigated the Young Hegelians for confining social activity to concepts. For him, their work amounted to a plea for thinking better without one for doing better. Effectively, this confined philosophy to the  scholastic function of contemplating abstract ideas (This is why Ernst Bloch quips, “in Hegel philosophy becomes a headmaster”<sup>9</sup>).

Marx proposed an alternative, one rooted in “the real individuals, their activity and the material conditions of their life, both those which they find already existing and those produced by their activity.”<sup>10</sup> In other words, Marx called for a thought grounded in human life, in how humans sustain themselves. Marx reached the conclusion that philosophy would simply be irrelevant if it couldn’t account for these sorts of things. Further, it should not just offer an *account* at all, but should provide a path to help people improve their lives. This position was most famously summarized in the conclusion to the so-called “Theses on Feuerbach,” where Marx wrote, “The philosophers have only *interpreted* the world in various ways; the point, however, is to *change* it.”<sup>11</sup>

I would argue that a form of idealism dictates the tone of much writing on genre. In her study “Genre Study and Television,” Feuer formalizes the notion that genre itself is an ideological category:
<blockquote>Genre is a construct of an analyst. The methodology that the analyst brings to bear upon the texts determines the way in which that analyst will construct the genre. Genres are made, not born. The coherence is provided in the process of construction, and a genre is ultimately an abstract conception rather than something that exists empirically in the world.<sup>12</sup></blockquote>

Feuer’s decision to reject genre as naturally born is a necessary pushback against a bygone generation of literary formalists like Northrop Frye (who perhaps more than any early writer is a spectre haunting contemporary genre theory).<sup>13</sup> But Feuer chooses to battle formalism in the spirit of Feuerbach, who argued that many of religion’s most fundamental categories were actually human rather than divine.<sup>14</sup> Disenchanting the now fundamentally unthinkable proposition that genres emerge from nature, she insists instead that they are instead dreamt up in the head.

Feuer also orients genre theory toward suspicion, one that matches a broader suspicious tendency in the academy today.<sup>15</sup> She suggests that we should be suspicious of genre, since the actions of the analyst impose order on something that does not actually exist in the world. This suspicion more generally pervades a commonplace understanding that discussing norms is hubristic, rigid, even a form of dominance enacted in the realm of ideas. This sentiment is manifest most of all in the general hostility toward *taxonomy*, the attempt to delineate genre rules on a categorical level. Stern denunciations of Aristotelian poetics or evocations of Foucaudian orders “imposed on things” abound in genre theory.<sup>16</sup> This tendency is best exemplified by Derrida’s 1978 lecture on the topic, “The Law of Genre.” There, he argues that a *law* – what he also calls *the voice* – functions akin to a juridical demand, insisting: “GENRES ARE NOT to be mixed.”<sup>17</sup> Derrida was not attacking categories *as such*. In fact, he took them quite seriously. His claim here, “there is no genreless text” (212), parallels his famous proclamation from Of Grammatology: “there is nothing outside of the text.”<sup>18</sup>

Even so, good postructrualist that he is, Derrida privileges a vision of art that evades genre’s normative force. Throughout the essay, he contrasts the juridical commitments of genre with moments at its “liminal edge” (210). These are ones that illustrate that genre necessarily fails. As he insists, “participation [in genre] never amounts to belonging.” Instead, he argues that a text “belongs without belonging, and the ‘without’ (or the suffix ‘-less’) which relates belonging to non-belonging appears only in the timeless time of the blink of an eye” (212). In writing this, Derrida is also being a good romantic. It is no accident that his original text uses the German phrase *Augenblick*, a term that abounds in literary romanticism. Derrida aligns with the literature of privileged moments and singularities. He extolls Blanchot’s *La Folie du jour*, a text he affectionately describes as “not even quite a book” (213). Thus, despite his deconstructive contrast between law and freedom, Derrida sides with the latter. Freedom here too means idealism, choosing to liberate our minds from the law of genre.<sup>19</sup>
<br>
<br>
<br>
**Endnotes**
<br>

1. Raya Dunayevskaya, *The Power of Negativity: Selected Writings on the Dialectic in Hegel and Marx*, ed. Peter Hudis and Kevin B. Anderson (New York: Lexington Books, 2002), 227.

2. Disagreement abounds as to what this tradition could be called. Cf. Andrew Feenberg, *The Philosophy of Praxis: Marx, Lukács, And The Frankfurt School* (Brooklyn, NY: Verso, 2014) and Perry Anderson, Considerations on Western Marxism (London: Verso, 1979). Further disagreement abounds as to whether it constitutes a tradition at all. Commentators have varyingly questioned or reaffirmed Marx’s fidelity to Hegel (eg. Louis Althusser, *For Marx*, trans. Ben Brewster [New York: Verso, 2006]; ); Adorno’s to Hegel and Marx (eg. Gillian Rose, *The Melancholy Science* [Brooklyn, NY: Verso, 2014]; ); etc.. While a full dissertation would be needed just to review this literature, suffice to say: I like “historical materialism” because it is the most neutral term available. It avoids the disparaging implications of terms like “Western Marxism,” which often is used to suggest that political movements or social programs originating outside of the Eastern Bloc are outside of legitimate political struggle. And I think of it as a tradition expressing a set of centrally linked concerns in the spirit of JM Bernstein, “Negative Dialectic as Fate: Adorno and Hegel,” in *The Cambridge Companion to Adorno*, ed. Tom Huhn (Cambridge University Press, 2004), 19–50.

3. Gillian Rose, *Mourning Becomes the Law: Philosophy and Representation* (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 8.

4. A selection of exemplary studies of genre in music includes David Brackett, *Categorizing Sound: Genre and Twentieth-Century Popular Music* (Oakland, CA: University of California Press, 2016); Franco Fabbri, “A Theory of Musical Genres: Two Applications,” in *Popular Music Perspectives: Papers from the First International Conference on Popular Music Research*, Amsterdam, 1981, 52–81; Franco Fabbri and Iain Chambers, “What Kind of Music?,” *Popular Music* 02, Theory and Method (1982): 131–43; Simon Frith, *Performing Rites: On the Value of Popular Music* (Harvard University Press, 1998); Keith Negus, *Music Genres and Corporate Cultures* (New York: Routledge, 1999); Jason Toynbee, *Making Popular Music: Musicians, Creativity, and Institutions* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000); Eric Weisbard, *Top 40 Democracy: The Rival Mainstreams of American Music* (Chicago: University Of Chicago Press, 2014). I should note that in the case of that last text, Weisbard takes issue with the privileging of genre over radio formats.

5. John Frow, *Genre*, Second Edition (New York: Routledge, 2014), 10.

6. Toynbee, *Making Popular Music: Musicians, Creativity, and Institutions*, 107.

7. Brackett, *Categorizing Sound*, 13.

8. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*, vol. 5 (New York: International Publishers Co., 1976), 30. I have modified the translation slightly to remove unnecessary gendering of language and awkwardness of phrasing.

9. Ernst Bloch, *The Spirit of Utopia*, trans. Anthony A. Nassar (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2000), 185.

10. Marx and Engels, *Collected Works*, 5:31.

11. Ibid., 5:8.

12. Feuer, “Genre Study and Television,” in *Channels of Discourse, Reassembled*, ed. Robert C. Allen (Chapel Hill: UNC Press, 1992), 144.

13. Eg. Northrop Frye, *Anatomy of Criticism: Four Essays* (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000); for an early critique of Frye, see Tzvetan Todorov, *The Fantastic: A Structural Approach to a Literary Genre*, trans. Richard Howard (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1975); for examples of the way music theorists have recently engaged with Frye (albeit in a more pragmatic manner, rejecting much of the transcendentalism that structures Frye’s own thought), see Byron Almén, “Narrative Archetypes: A Critique, Theory, and Method of Narrative Analysis,” *Journal of Music Theory* 47:01 (Spring 2003): 1–39; Michael L. Klein, “Ironic Narrative, Ironic Reading,” *Journal of Music Theory* 53:01 (Spring 2009): 95–136.

14. Ludwig Feuerbach, *The Essence of Christianity*, trans. George Eliot (Mineola, NY: Dover, 2012).

15. On suspicion in the academy, see Rita Felski, *The Limits of Critique* (Chicago: University Of Chicago Press, 2015); William Cheng and Susan McClary, *Just Vibrations: The Purpose of Sounding Good* (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2016).

16. Feuer, “Genre Study and Television,” 139; Garin Dowd, “"Introduction: Genre Matters in Theory and Criticism,” in *Genre Matters: Essays in Theory and Criticism*, ed. Garin Dowd, Lesley Stevenson, and Jeremy Strong (Portland, OR: Intellect, 2006), 11.

17. Jacque Derrida, “The Law of Genre,” in *Appendix: Bulletin of the International Colloquium on Genre*, 1978, 202–203.

18. Derrida, *Of Grammatology*, trans. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, Corrected Edition (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998), 158.

19. For a similar line of commentary, see Frow, *Genre*, 25–28. Frow himself is not exempt from this criticism. While he defends the force of genre, he privileges a theory that is no less idealist in its tendency to elevate the linguistic turn over the typological impulses of “Aristotelian categories.” See 51-71 for his account of this shift.
