
---
layout: post
---

I’ve been working on an article on the long-running controversy surrounding the ‘base-superstructure’ schema. This framework has vexed writers for a century, and has been at the heart of feuds about what art is and how it relates to social life more generally. In this piece, I try to untangle some of the issues within that discussion, some of which I think are a result of confusion or authors speaking past each other. I use two great books by G.A. Cohen and Dileep Edara, both of which I think help provide us a solid foundation to rework a lot of the problematic analysis that has marred the legacy of base-superstructure theory.

This post excerpts the primary theoretical sections of that piece. When it’s finished, I’ll be sure to circulate info about that article. Please get in touch if you’re interested in seeing full citations for any of my sources!
<br>
<br>
<b>Abstract</b>
<br>
This piece rethinks the infamous base-superstructure schema. Despite rampant controversy about its use–not to mention widespread confusion as to what it actually references–I argue that there is enduring utility to understanding art through a superstructural framework. Drawing on the writings of G.A. Cohen and Dileep Edara, I formalize a restrictive conception of the superstructure, narrowly understood as the group of institutions that comprise the State and civil society. After theorizing some implications of this account, I use the example of the contemporary Nation-State to illustrate its applicability. Ultimately, I demonstrate that there are ways to meaningfully consider the role of economic relations in determining the character of aesthetic practices, as well as the functionalist nature of art under capitalism.
<br>
<br>
<b>1. Introduction</b>
<br>
The base-superstructure schema is one of the most foundational principles of materialist aesthetic theory. As the Welsh writer Raymond Williams proclaimed in the 1973 essay ‘Base and Superstructure in Marxist Cultural Theory’, probably the most influential text on the topic, ‘any modern approach to a Marxist theory of culture must begin by considering the proposition of a determining base and a determined superstructure’ (Williams 1980, 31). Indeed, this framework has anchored the broadest discussions about the relationship of art to society more generally. Even where that particular language is not directly used, associated concepts often linger in the background. Throughout the history of social theory, the tension between the aesthetic and crude economic interest has functioned as a springboard for invectives against the worst ills of capitalism–as well as a launching place for visions of a more democratic form of culture to come.

Despite its centrality, Marxists have often displayed unease, even contempt for the idea that art occupies a functional position in capitalist society. The base-superstructure schema has been further marginalized by a range of developments, from the collapse of the Actually Existing Socialist regimes that supported the development of Marxist theory, to the rise of cultural studies and alternative models for the sociology of art. Just a few decades after Williams penned his influential text, his student Terry Eagleton would observe that the idea had been transformed into a ‘universally reviled paradigm’ (Eagleton 2000, 237).

This article revisits base and superstructure, arguing that there is still merit in this framework. I develop a model for schematizing artistic production, as well as for theorizing the place of art within the capitalist mode of production. Deploying what can be called a <i>restrictive</i> conception of the superstructure, I claim that art might be productively discussed in terms of superstructural institutions: State and civil society organizations that support non-economic artistic ventures.

I begin by reviewing debates about superstructures, starting with Marx’s own writing on the topic and continuing with the works of some of his more influential commentators. Debates about the superstructure have been plagued by disagreement and confusion, centered on three core issues: its definition, the extent to which the base determines the character of the superstructure, and the function of superstructural institutions in capitalist society.

The central task of my essay is to develop a more precise definition of the superstructure. Drawing on the work of G.A. Cohen and Dileep Edara, I define the superstructure as a group of non-economic institutions, primarily those comprising the State and civil society (Cohen 2000; Edara 2016). This restrictive theory stresses the organizational character of the superstructure–that is to say, it underscores the fact that the superstructure is a narrow group of <i>institutions</i>, including government divisions, churches, schools, and NGOs. It further emphasizes that the superstructure is not inclusive of all non-economic entities.

This definition goes against a commonplace assumption, held by some Marxists and anti-Marxists alike, that aesthetic experience itself is best understood as a superstructural activity within the Marxian system (E.g. Eagleton 2002, 5; Jameson 1971, 4). The restrictive conception moderates the scope of the base-superstructure schema, limiting the extent to which we can generalize about art and capitalism. However, I claim that a more precise account of the superstructure allows us to revisit classic issues of determinacy and function–those questions about the influence of the economic sphere on art, and the reasons that societies enlist cultural activities for purposive ends. Art is not a superstructure, but it is deeply shaped by superstructural institutions: universities, not-for-profits, State funding offices, religious groups, and scores of other civil society organizations. It is also developed through a wide range of economic ventures, and the social character of art is fundamentally impacted by the relationship between the two.

After theorizing some implications of this restrictive conception of superstructure, I illustrate the framework using the example of the modern day Nation-State. I focus on the United States, specifically the case of the National Endowment of the Arts, one of the largest public sources of arts funding in the country. This example models a way to analyze determinacy and function in the context of art. For better and for worse, culture <i>is</i> often tethered by prevailing economic conditions. The base-superstructure schema helps us to locate art within a social formation dominated by capitalist relations, and shows how profoundly this setting hinders the development of robust, public forms of life.
[…]

<br>
<br>
<b>3. Defining Superstructure</b>
<br>
The concept of a superstructure seldom appears in Marx’s writings. His most definitive statement on the topic is found in the Preface to <i>A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy</i> (1859). This text opens with an intriguing paragraph, which outlines what Marx calls the ‘guiding principle of my studies’:
<blockquote>
In the social production of their existence, men inevitably enter into definite relations, which are independent of their will, namely relations of production appropriate to a given stage in the development of their material forces of production. The totality of these relations of production constitutes the economic structure of society, the real foundation, on which arises a legal and political superstructure and to which correspond definite forms of social consciousness. The mode of production of material life conditions the general process of social, political and intellectual life. It is not the consciousness of men that determines their existence, but their social existence that determines their consciousness (Marx and Engels 1975, 29: 262, 263).
</blockquote>

This passage is dense and evocative. In particular, Marx implies that there is a connection between the human will and relations of production, gestures at the notion of an economic structure, and presents the curious idea that social existence determines ‘the consciousness of men’. Fundamentally, he contrasts the economic foundation or structure of society with a legal and political superstructure.

This paragraph has generated a long-running debate, encompassing a number of key registers. With regards to the base-superstructure schema in particular, the debate has focused on three primary issues:

<ol>
<li><i>Definition</i> – What is an economic structure, and what is a superstructure? How can we systematize these terms in order to yield a sufficient organizational theory of the capitalist mode of production?</li>
<li><i>Determinacy</i>  – What did Marx mean by the claim that social existence ‘determines’ consciousness, and to what extent does this bear upon the base-superstructure schema? Do economic matters somehow shape the <i>internal</i> character of practices such as art and law?</li>
<li><i>Function</i> – What is the purpose of the superstructure? Is there a precise role for the State, culture, or other entities in the reproduction of the capitalist system?</li>
</ol>

I will return to the questions of determinacy and function below, which have constituted the heart of the debate about superstructures. However, it is worth beginning with the definitional issue. If the schema presented in the above quotation has become a ‘universally reviled paradigm’, it is not wholly by virtue of the schema itself. In the course of debating whether or not social existence determines consciousness, commentators have tended to pay less attention to the simple question of what a superstructure actually is. 

To be fair, much of the blame goes to Marx and Engels themselves. It is clear that there are ambiguities in Marx’s intended meaning for terms such as ‘conditions’ or ‘determines’, as well as others resulting from the more general incompleteness of the account. Closely interrogating their comments only generates additional questions: does the ‘base’ of society contain everything that is arguably economic in nature? Is ‘superstructure’ anything else? Where does art fit into that schema, given that it is neither something exclusively economic in character, nor is it exclusively ‘legal and political’ in nature?

Such ambiguities have paved the way for strong disagreements. Some are definitional. Marxists have varyingly placed the superstructure everywhere on a spectrum from a precise theory of the ‘social formation’ of capitalism to the broadest expanse of linguistic and conceptual relations (Cf. Meiksins Wood 1995 and Voloshinov 1973). Other writers hold that the concept is a heuristic rather than an actual social entity, likening it to a ‘metaphor’ or an ‘ad hoc invention’ (Eagleton and Milne 1996, 21–24; Jameson 1990, 46). At times, the problem is a lack of precision. Stuart Hall’s interpretation curiously equates ‘civil society’ with ‘social relations and productive forces’, despite the fact that this definition reverses Marx’s own usage–and disregards a widespread contemporary understanding of the term ‘civil society’ to mean the collection of organizations that are precisely distinct from economic ones (Hall 2016, 76). Sometimes, the issue is a more basic kind of neglect. Raymond Williams’s essay, for example, never actually defines the word (Williams 1980, 32–34).

In this section, I revisit the basic definition of the superstructure. I draw on the writings of G.A. Cohen in <i>Karl Marx’s Theory of History: A Defense</i> (1978) and Dileep Edara in <i>Biography of a Blunder: Base and Superstructure in Marx and Later</i> (2016). Using their work, I present a restrictive conception of the base-superstructure schema, one that allows for greater precision in defining the organizational character of capitalism.

Cohen’s text is valuable for its exhaustive interpretation of the 1859 Preface, resulting in one of the clearest starting places for this discussion. Part of the confusion surrounding the schema results from definitions of the first concept, the economic base, so I begin here. For some, the term ‘economic’ might imply a range of entities, potentially including the marketplace, productive tools, capitalist firms, money, or ideologies. However, Cohen is narrow in his definition of the base, which he calls the <i>economic structure</i> of society. Following Marx’s own usage, Cohen equates economic structure with the ‘relations of production’, and so in turn develops a more precise definition of that concept. Relations of production can be thought of as relationships of ownership, or more precisely, as the ‘effective control’ of productive equipment or persons (Cohen 2000, 34–35). Within capitalism, a boss and a worker have a relation of production defined by specific conditions of ownership, primarily the boss’s ownership of private property, the worker’s sale of labor power, and the hierarchal dynamic between the two. There are many other relations of production, such as slavery, based on the coercive ownership of human beings as producers. Many production relations co-exist within an internally complex social formation, something seen in the contemporary persistence of slavery alongside relations ostensibly more endemic to advanced industrial capitalism.

It helpful to differentiate relations of production from another Marxian phrase that appears in the 1859 Preface, <i>forces of production</i>. For Cohen, this category encompasses: 1.) Means of Production–the instruments of production and raw materials used within productive activity. As examples, we can think of a machine that is used by workers in a factory or office, along with the energy source that powers their equipment; 2.) Labor Power–the ‘productive faculties’ of producing agents. This register includes all the skills of workers, including bodily abilities, knowledges, and any other capacities that directly aid them in work (Cohen 2000, 31–32). Productive forces, broadly, includes the tools, whether mental or physical in nature, that humans use to go about productive activity.

Cohen contrasts these concepts with the superstructure, which he defines as ‘legal, political, religious, and other non-economic institutions’. Later, he further adds that these institutions most notably (but not exclusively) include ‘the legal system and the state’ (Cohen 2000, 45, 216). After Cohen, we can understand the superstructure to be the group of institutions comprising the public sector and civil society; said group includes organizations that make up the State, such as the legal system, the military, and public educational institutions, as well as a range of non-economic institutions including religious groups, NGOs, community organizations, and non-profit universities.

Because some confusion exists about this issue, it is worth underscoring part of Cohen’s definition: the superstructure refers to <i>institutions</i>. We should be cautious about describing every non-economic entity as a superstructure. The superstructure is not equivalent to productive forces, commodities, persons, or mental states, even if it does necessarily relate to such entities.

In <i>Biography of a Blunder: Base and Superstructure in Marx and Later</i> (2016), Dileep Edara characterizes this understanding as a ‘restrictive’ definition of superstructure. In the book–one of the few, sorely needed studies of this topic–Edara conducts a painstakingly detailed reading of Marx’s writings on the matter, as well as a careful review of the secondary literature. He concludes that we should be narrow in our conception of the superstructure. In this spirit, he writes,

<blockquote>
[T]he theory of the base and the superstructure is not an all-encompassing paradigm that explains away all the social spheres in reference to the economy, as it is widely believed to have done, but a conceptual model to explicate the inextricable connection between the production relations (the base) and politics and law (superstructure) (Edara 2016, 16).
</blockquote>

Edara maintains here that the superstructure exclusively refers to what is commonly called the ‘public’ sector: State-affiliated political and legal institutions. In this sense, his conception is stricter than Cohen’s, though they agree about the inexhaustive character of the term (Cohen 2000, 31). In either case, the point is well taken: the superstructure should be understood as a narrow set of institutions, and we should not equate murkier notions like art or ideology with the concept. (This observation does not deny that we can discuss art or ideology in tandem with superstructures, and I will say more about just how we might in the following section.)

The restrictive framework allows us to bring a degree of clarity to the matter. The superstructure is a group of institutions within the State and civil society, ones that are primarily or partially non-economic in character. Importantly, this domain is not meant to exhaust all sorts of human activities, nor to advance a stronger thesis that the economy determines every aspect of social life. Rather, it is meant to give us an organizational theory of capitalism, a framework for defining and analyzing the many institutions that coexist in an internally complex society.
<br>
<br>
<b>Theorizing Art and the Superstructure</b>
<br>
Based on the foregoing discussion, it is misleading to insist that art is (or isn’t) autonomous from the superstructure. Art institutions can be superstructural, economic, mixed, or neither. It does not make sense to characterize the multibillion dollar company Sony Interactive Entertainment as part of the superstructure. In fact, commercial art ventures can substantively be understood as economic activities, and discussed in terms of the Marxian economic schema. Capitalist firms deploy forces of production, both means of production (e.g. paintbrushes, software suites, semi-trailer trucks) and the labor power of a wide range of workers (e.g. painters, accountants, truck drivers). Artmaking also has specific relations of production, the dynamics of ownership and employment within any given arts industry. These relations come from both the globalized mode of production of contemporary capitalism and a range of residual models absorbed from non-capitalist forms of labor: the serialized production of a Fender Stratocaster electric guitar on a Mexican assembly line, or the master-apprentice workshop construction of a handmade classical guitar in Spain.

Meanwhile, the court that enforces Sony’s copyright over their intellectual property is undeniably superstructural, as is a State office that doles out grants, or a non-profit that organizes community arts programs. Art is made in universities, religious spaces, and other venues, ones that often have a degree of legal or financial separation from the market. Of course, we can think of complicated instances, as when: a businessowner donates to a non-profit artistic venture; a nominally public university grows its endowment through financial speculation; or a church amasses wealth in the form of land. These cases only add to the richness of the discussion, but they further show that it is unhelpful to think of art as something reducible to or autonomous from the economic base of society.

The restrictive framework does present a few challenges. To begin, we need to think about what to make of the concept of art itself. Few definitions of art would stop at the mere institutions that fund artistic ventures. Most writings on the topic from within the Marxist tradition are also concerned with the <i>aesthetic</i>–aspects such as style, meaning, performance, and taste.

Cohen does not discuss aesthetics, but he offers a parallel account of science that provides guidelines for thinking about conceptual entities such as ideology, art, and the like. He shows that we should not wedge science as a whole into any part of the base-superstructure schema, given that the concept overlaps with economic and non-economic spheres. Scientific knowledge clearly plays a role in productive activity, as when a for-profit company uses chemistry or engineering to design a new product. (Where scientific knowledge is specifically deployed within the process of manufacture, Cohen would say that it is best understood as a <i>force of production</i>.) Science also involves superstructural institutions, including secondary schools, universities, and research institutes. It further includes something that transcends the walls of any institution, that ideal thing constituting the intellectual domain of science itself (Cohen 2000, 45–46).

This account does not contradict the view that science can advance nefarious economic agendas, or even a stronger thesis that science is fundamentally determined by institutional paradigms. Context matters. Research can be undertaken personally by an individual who holds an intrinsic love of knowledge, by a teacher in a course offered at a state-funded university, or by a R&D department tasked with finding new sources of profit. (We can again think of in-between cases, as when a university laboratory, supported by a mix of public and private funds, produces knowledge that may potentially be used to generate patents or commodities.) Regardless, it does not make sense to think of science as a purely superstructural entity, whatever else it may be.

We can extend this analysis to the aesthetic. Art is also a complicated case. It encompasses ideal elements (e.g. sensory pleasure, beauty), strictly technical aspects (e.g. a synthesizer, a painter’s skill), and a range of institutions that support artistic activity (e.g. for-profit companies, public universities). Following Cohen, we can see that it is mystifying to insist on the basic or superstructural character of art’s immaterial aspects, while still considering the ways in which organizational context might significantly impact artistic production.

<br>
<br>
<b>Determinacy and Function</b>
<br>
There is also more to be said about the determinate character and function of superstructures. To this point, I have deliberately sidestepped these issues, even while acknowledging that they have been the heart of the debate about the Marxist conception of superstructure. Edara concedes that the value of Marx’s schema is found in his commitment to a ‘highly nuanced exposition of a complex organic system with its multidimensional relations defined by words signifying different degrees and types of influence and determination’ (Edara 2016, 76). Cohen similarly accepts the importance of these matters, arguing that ‘the substantive question is: to what extent are non-economic institutions superstructural?’ (Cohen 2000, 216).

Given a restrictive superstructural framework, we can finally answer Cohen’s question. It might seem self-evident from the foregoing, but there cannot be a singular answer. There is no meaningful way to generalize about the determined character of art in society, nor is it possible to ascribe a singular function to culture. Art exists within a range of institutions across all major social sectors, with varying degrees of influence from the market. The term potentially indexes the most crudely financial ventures along with the most emphatically personal, as well as a complex array of institutions, production models, and actors. Further, it can theoretically be recruited for the most debased forms of propaganda or conducted in deep isolation from political and economic matters, something that will vary significantly based on its context.

This argument should not imply that we cannot have any discussion about the social significance of art. The restrictive framework is more nuanced, but in some senses, easier to use. We do not need to resort to grand theory or speculation, positing art as a unilateral opium of the masses or heart of a heartless world. Rather, we may speak concretely about the role of institutional settings in cultural activity; just as we can say that an economic concern motivates science when it is deployed by a for-profit weapons manufacturer for the purposes of development, we can think about art as it is enlisted toward various economic and social purposes within a well-defined system of production relations. 

This task does require looking at artistic practices on a case-by-case basis, and thinking carefully about the mechanisms of determination that actually exist. We can ask questions like: what causal factors shape this artistic venture? Are they direct choices of a producer, or are they motivated by more nebulous social imperatives? Is a corporation the primary arbiter, is a civil society institution, or–as can often be the case–is it some mixture of the two? Which actual agents make these decisions, and what sorts of authority do they have? For whom are these decisions made–a market, a parish, or the anonymous masses of the citizenry?

We can imagine very different types of causality. A poet who is subject to the whims of the market is in a different situation than one living on State and foundation grants, as is another who holds a tenured position at a public university. We can also think about different shades of utility: to the liturgical music of the Roman Catholic Church; to a rendition of ‘The Star-Spangled Banner’ being sung by fourth graders at a public elementary school; to a performance of a Renaissance music ensemble at a private university with a billion-dollar endowment; and to the whistling that staves off the boredom of a city bus driver on a slow afternoon.

Meaningfully, we can consider intricate relations of production in different artistic contexts. The art world is made up of CEOs, financial analysts, programmers, and manual laborers, but also, curators, singers, professors, and organizers. Each of these agents can exist within distinctive organizations, and each possesses varying degrees of authority. The lines of causality here are not always neat: private sector institutions have a relatively hierarchal structure within their relations of production, but are subject to market whims prompted by internal competition between firms. Meanwhile, civil society institutions enjoy a degree of protection from the marketplace, but workers there often have to appeal to a smaller group of donors, grant offices, or university administrators. It is possible to sort out these aspects. In fact, it is simple–and doing so enables us to speak quite forcefully when such matters clearly impact cultural activity.
[…]
