This is the text of a talk I’m giving at Left Forum this weekend. The panel is a discussion of <a href=” http://www.brill.com/products/book/art-and-value” target=”_blank”><em>Art and Value</em></a> by Dave Beech. Beech will be responding to my paper along with three others.

<h1>Theorizing Popular Music’s Economic Exceptionalism: A Sketch</h1>

Dave Beech’s <em>Art and Value</em> rocks not just the foundation of theories about the relationship of art and capitalism, but most academic and critical theories of culture. Such work cannot but presuppose something about economics, whether concerned with meaning, social function, or artistic form in a society shaped paradigmatically by its relationship to the marketplace. As Beech forcefully shows, these presuppositions have been poor.

This book is exciting to me as someone interested in approaching such questions via Marxism – already marginal in aesthetic theory – and in particular the critique of political economy Marx rather than the Western Marxist or anti-Marxist paradigms that tend to dominate artistic scholarship. Given that I’d wager each of us up here has our doubts about the amenability of such disciplines to any substantial left wing alternative, I wonder whether they will care to listen. But my suspicion is that this book might inspire a sea change among those who think about art’s economics, at least among those who are concerned with getting the story right.
Beech’s book is partially forceful for its willingness to critically engage a thesis long taken for granted as either self-evident or blasphemous: that art is “economically exceptional,” which is to say, is subject to only an “anomalous, incomplete, and paradoxical commodification” (14). But it takes such a position in a fashion that is novel, refusing to presume a distinction between a pure sphere removed from the messy strictures of capitalism and one where the instrumentality of capital defines all possible experience.

Beech rather starts from the economic fact of the matter, demonstrating that that if art will be found exceptional, it will be as an <em>exception to</em> the rule of capital. As he shows, art’s economic character is undeniable – if simply we mean that artmaking involves things like money, sale, and spent time – but the exact nature of this situation remains a matter of quite some mystery. Moreover, its exceptionalism cannot possibly be an outgrowth of the organic, non-capitalist space that dominates the imaginations of artists and critics (and perhaps all of us up here at some point or another during our careers in the arts). Such a fantasy has led to narrow thinking on this topic, in which art is assumed to be chasing after our dreams or struggling to return to their Edenic origins.
If our hopes for art have been misguided, this portends both necessary realignments of our thinking and the possibility of newer, better accounts of art’s progressive character. Ultimately, what Beech’s book offers is a model for how to rethink musical history, theory, and politics.

I work in popular music studies, and Beech’s book has particularly kindled my excitement about rethinking many of the inherited truths about popular music. In a sketchy form, I want to use Beech’s account to set up how such work might potentially proceed.
Popular music strikes me as noteworthy in the context of this discussion for a few reasons. The first is the novelty of the economics of popular music. Popular music forms a middle ground between film and visual art. It constitutes more of an industry (of sorts, at least) than visual art, where painters and small collectors reign. Even so, much of popular music’s life still originates in the realm of subjective use value. The decisions of artists (or their perceived decisions) comprise a significant factor in the reception of their work, and the model of production therefore leans far away from the one of industrial manufacture. Compare this to, say, film, which – whatever the role of auteurship and visionary creativity – is sustained by elaborate networks of studio investments, waged staffers, and costumers unions.

	The second thing that strikes me as novel here is the scholarly world of popular music studies. Unlike many areas of arts scholarship, pop studies has been emphatically interested in dollars and cents from its first years. This is certainly more emphatic than in mainstream musicology, which originates in the aesthetic realm. But it is also a comparably “vulgar” discipline than those concerned with painting, film, and TV, where high theory has tended to be quite central.
  
	Despite its interest in the economic, pop studies certainly falls victim to Beech’s critique of scholarship on the economics of art; his charge against Marxism more generally also functions as an a neat summary of pop studies when it talks economics:
<blockquote>“Marxists have taken the economics of art for granted (as commodity production) or bypassed economics in a sociological theory of art, augmented with psychoanalysis, ideology, politics and aesthetics” (356).</blockquote>

I’ll say a bit more about this exact point in a moment, but suffice to say here: the net effect of these observations is to suggest that across its history, pop studies has been quite interested in the economic, but often taken it for granted – or rerouted it into anything but.

This is certainly <em>historical</em> in character. Popular music studies is actually an interloper into musicology. It grows up in tandem with cultural studies, emerging from sociology and anthropology rather music departments. For this reason, aesthetic value was, if not secondary, at least not the terminal goal of scholars.

Meanwhile, musicology took its cues from history, philosophy of art, even mathematics, before it turned toward the economics. This is why, I think, that discipline has struggled to develop even a robust sociology of music, let alone an economics of it. Adorno was assimilated into the mainstream of the discipline much later, meaning that his reception was clumsy, and even less Marxist – for a philosopher who all of us up here agree had rather limited commitments to Marxism in the first place – than it was in philosophy and social theory.

The situation was the reverse in popular music studies. Sociology of popular music overshadowed the aesthetics of it. To this day, musicology has played a marginal role alongside history, anthropology, cultural studies, comp lit, media studies – despite heavily dominating those disciplines in all other avenues of musical inquiry.

In his “Towards an Aesthetics of Popular Music,” Simon Frith – now something of an elder statesman of popular music studies – noted the resistance of sociologists to aesthetic questions. He himself was trained as a sociologist, and early works such as the <em>Sociology of Rock</em> (1978) and <em>Sound Effects</em> (1981) foregrounded the economic and social dimensions of music in a manner seldom matched by scholars today. But in “Towards and Aesthetics,” Frith lamented the dominance of sociological over aesthetic questions, proposing a set of then-perverse questions: “how do we make musical value judgments? How do such value judgments articulate the listening experiences involved?”

Unbeknownst to Frith, such questions would quickly become paradigmatic in scholarship of the arts. Frith’s model was one that would come to be dominant, not in the least because of his imprecise usage of the term value to mean both questions of dollars and cents and subjective feelings about quality.
  
The tendency to be slippery on questions of Value with a capital V has a second, paradigmatic origin point in the work of Adorno. Pop studies also anticipated musicology on a second front: it’s frequent and early engagements with that writer’s work. For pop scholars in the seventies and eighties, Adorno’s model was an exciting starting place. He was one of the first serious intellectuals to write about popular music, and so a potential model. That he seemed to disregard the intrinsic merits of popular music also made him a seductive adversary from the old guard.

In this spirit, popular music studies set about overcoming Adorno’s work, in particular his perceived economic reductionism. Time and again, methodological treatises start with his example, regarding it as a foundation to be heroically overcome to win a serious science for popular music.
  
This meant that popular studies, on the one hand, grows out of a general aversion to Marxism. Adorno’s reduction of popular culture to a mechanism of profit has stood in for a broader Marxian tradition that Beech notes has heavily – and problematically – supposed a hypothesis about art’s commodification. This has meant that even those who do take seriously the ill effects of capital have often counterintuitively sought to defend it in the name of legitimating an aesthetic practice they presume to be born in the belly of the capitalist beast. Again, from Frith, who affirmatively cites Walter Benjamin as the originator of an argument that resisted Marxist reductionism:

<blockquote>“[His account] suggested that popular music could – in some circumstances – express something more than the culture of profit; that record buying could – under some cultural conditions – mean something more than passive consumption” (<em>Sound Effects</em>, 48).</blockquote>

Seeking to salvage the progressive character of personal acts of consumption, Frith dedicated a great deal of energy to refuting early Marxist champions of 1970s punk. He castigated the Birmingham School in particular for its tendency to privilege politicized alternative musics over standard shopping. This has set the tone for popular music studies, which has often sought to build politics on strategies of ethical consumption.

	On the other hand, then, popular music studies has retained a strain of romantic anti-capitalism in its stead. Pop studies has a strong tone of anti-Marxism from the left. Though his model for popular culture is paltry compared to Adorno’s, Benjamin is widely beloved by those who find his account of reproducibility a less bitter pill to swallow. His work is often presented in treatises as an anti-dote to Adorno’s dour arguments (e.g. Negus, Middleton), or used to engineer theories of music’s progressive dimensions (e.g. Dunn, “If It Ain’t Cheap, It Ain’t Punk”). In these and similar accounts, pop studies has grasped at those moments which seem to best elude capital as potential free spaces wherein democratic culture truly thrives.

Given this ideological climate, pop studies has displayed a curious tension. The belief that popular music is inextricable from capitalism is a near truism. And yet, there is a general lack of knowledge about basic mechanisms of popular music production. Time and again, popular music scholars have to fight to reverse engineer what are essentially basic observations about the money behind music production. For example, Eric Weisbard recently had to write a book arguing for the importance of radio formats alongside musical genre – abstract aesthetic categories – despite this long being the structure of the radio, one of the most important music distribution technologies in history. From Tin Pan Alley to the Brill Building and Tidal, production and distribution models have been central to theories of popular music without wholly being understood.

	Moreover, many of the solutions for how to challenge that world of production have been based on misguided assumptions. If, as Beech demonstrates throughout his book, many of the practices most endemic to musical life in the capitalist epoch are themselves not capitalist in any strong sense of the word, this means that many of the things taken to “resist” capital through their inherent nature simply… don’t. In this sense, while the more obvious implication of Beech’s book has to do with how to write economic theory and history, it equally offers challenges to many of the most fundamental political presuppositions operating within music studies writ large. 

To conclude my paper, I want to sketch out a set of preliminary observations and assumptions necessary for conducting just that sort of work. The economics of popular music are interesting for a number of reasons. Here I want to sketch out a handful of commonplace theoretical assumptions, potentially misguided, that could be important factors in rewriting such a history.

<strong>1. “Social use value” seems more patently inscribed into popular music than visual art.</strong>

At the least, the emphasis on the artist’s personal use value plays a more minor role in popular music than in visual art. People often do “musick” together, perform as amateurs, sing together, and so on, just as Beech’s baker bakes bread with his son. But mostly, they listen to commercially produced music, and even where they do replicate such music outside of official consumption networks, do so in a fashion where the distinction is less clear.

	The artist’s subjectivity is also generally of less importance to popular music’s value. There is a cottage industry of biography, film, etc., but this pales in centrality of high arts art. There, the personas of artists are not just more central to experiences of their works, but net $40 million dollar sale prices for such works.

<strong>2. “Fancy prices” play a much smaller role in popular music.</strong>

Beech corrects misconceptions about the big ticket sales of otherwise cheap commodities. The multi-million dollar sales of Picasso paintings or the designer handbag that sells for thousands – their prices greatly exceed the expense of production, often a few hundred dollars or so.

Again, there is a cottage industry within popular music for such artifacts. For example, there are the commemorative box sets of 1960s prestige artists such as the Rolling Stones and the Beatles, and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame-style collectibles that fetch big prices. The former remain comparably proportionate to the contents (e.g. their price is close, if not just, the market price of, say, ten CDs). Meanwhile, the latter are relatively exceptional in the overall focus of the music industry.

<strong>3. Avant-gardism – the originality ascribed to art by writers such as Rosalind Krauss – is less commonly a marker of any form of success.</strong>

In popular music, the effect of originality, marginality, and the tortured genius less commonly points toward success.  Subculture, not immortality, is the effect of being incompatible with musical mainstreams. This has occasionally been offset by symbolic prestige; as Beech notes, commercial and critical success do not necessarily correspond (356). Some critics and intellectuals have rallied around different forms of avant-garde popular culture. (Punk strikes me as the most representative example.) But this pales in comparison to the prestige garnered by great visual artists. In that world, art history textbooks and museum catalogs constitute a large portion of the life of works that live as singularities in a private collector’s home. In popular music, name recognition more directly corresponds to sales than in visual art. And obscurity generally means lack of success.

I also want to discuss a few areas I can see requiring further thought.

<strong>1. The shifting modes of popular music production during its history.<strong>

There are many ways popular music has been made during its history (some perhaps so substantial we might need to rethink what we mean by popular music). In its early years, popular music is often understood as an industry built around the sale of sheet music, a set of performance traditions (e.g. minstrelsy theater), and a set of folk music practices with limited commercial capacity. In its history, it has seen a number of significant changes. Some striking examples include: the birth of a recording industry built on the reproduction and sale of fragments inherited from prior musical traditions, Tin Pan Alley, studio composition, the consolidation of a monopoly around a few record labels, and the emergence of an online- and digital-based model at the end of the twentieth century.

Many of these networks have been theorized improperly, a function of a failure to accept that practices exceptional to capital also coexist alongside it. While music production has often been systematized in many ways through its history, these have had different relations to capital (often rather limited). I’ll name just one here: Beech’s own example of Coloniel Parker, Elvis’s manager, who often insisted that Elvis be given songwriting credits on songs he did not write. This was an effect of the singer’s star power, and generated revenue him that he did not “earn” through composition, posing a problem for classically Marxist questions of surplus value production. As Beech suggests, it would be absurd to consider Parker, the songwriter, or Elvis himself a capitalist or worker in any meaningful sense.


<strong>2. Popular culture is largely determined by its reproducibility.</strong>

Beech launches a necessary challenge to the readings of Krauss and others, which suggest that mechanical reproduction undermines the primacy of (or, sometimes, the mere possibility of) originality. Growing up alongside musical production (at least, in its current dispensation), popular music is defined by its ameanability to reproduction and distribution. This has consequences for popular music as a practice, and presents some meaningful questions about how we might theorize it.

	Suffice to say here: reproducibility does not guarantee anything about the specific triumph or failure of a work, economically or critically. That pop music is technically capable of reproduction as a commodity does not guarantee its sale. My high school band’s demo tape was in principle no less distributable than a Katy Perry’s “Bon Appetit,” but has faired considerably worse in the Billboard Hot 100.
  
	While some of that might have been a question of aesthetics – she has a pristine pop sound, and we had a crappy teen punk sound – stylistic reproducibility also means something different in the context of pop. Popular music generally privileges accessibility and intelligibility, meaning that Katy Perry has generally outsold punk. Artists who defy such expectations – Kendrick Lamar and the late Beatles are just two who come to mind – have seen some success, but generally, pop music marks the inverse of art here.

<strong>3. Questions of judgment, value, and ideology need to be reconfigured.</strong>

Given popular music studies’ predilection for anthropological value (and conversely, the tendency for leftists <em>à la</em> the Frankfurt School to rely on totalizing commodification theses), we will need to give some thought to how and where to discuss judgment (if at all). Beech rightly notes that, however much they play a factor in any form of exchange, judgments of taste are necessarily non-economic. Even if such judgments influence economics (or, indeed, substantially proscribe financial success), these can only be made on aesthetic grounds.

This is a straightforward thought that has proven to be endlessly controversial in music studies. It has been tempting to deny the influence of the market on taste, or to reaffirm it, as in Adorno’s claim – however hyperbolic or improperly theorized – that exchange value presses upon use value in popular culture. This may simply need to be set aside, just as Marx did with use value.


<strong>4. Questions of Externalities Remain.</strong>

Related to this are the great many questions prompted by those externalities which could potentially prove to be factors in the sale of popular music. Especially today, I’d say the critical apparatus plays a fairly limited role in popular music. While 1970s rock and even 1980s hip hop were shaped to some extent by critics writing positively in magazines and the like, I’d wager that <em>Rolling Stone</em> and other such publications play comparably marginal roles in the vetting of artists.

Additionally, many processes of popular music distribution seem to be economically grounded, at the least. Payola, advertising, and many other processes make it clear that popular music does not work exactly in the terms of simple commodity production. <em>Urban Outfitters</em> supports the <em>Pitchfork</em> festival because of a desire to sell pants to those who will see parallels between inspired new bands and slim-fitting pants.

	Of course, that isn’t to deny the place of externalities of a less economic nature. A rave review in <em>Pitchfork</em> magazine has ignited critical success, and the <em>Billboard</em> charts still guide consumption. Untangling these knots seems to be crucial.

<strong>5. There are political consequences to any theorizing of popular music’s economics. </strong>

This last question has the greatest potential reverberations for music studies as it is currently practiced. Many possible inferences can be drawn from an analysis of popular music’s economics. People have varyingly assumed that: the connection to markets makes pop music more inherently free than art; more fascistic than art; more likely to provoke resistant alternatives; or more capable of engendering a new and truly democratic mass culture.

	In fact, the mere presumption of distinction between art has often relied on economic grounds (e.g. a practice defined by its mass distribution, in contrast to one reserved for privileged elites). Rethinking the production of popular music might reconfigure how and where we take these distinctions to be operative. Beech’s challenge against those who account for music’s economics stands as well for popular music:
  
<blockquote>“Politically… the left have been ill-prepared to defend art against market forces, incapable of distinguishing between those artists who produce commodities for the market, and those who do not” (356).</blockquote>

Many of our presumptions – about the typical character of the music business or the revolutionary alternatives born in subculture – might simply vanish if subjected to a more rigorous economic analysis.

This will potentially form a model for when, how, and if music might participate in left political struggle.
